The analyses carried out so far on the cemí
have been conducted with great care and precision
using methods
that respect the integrity of the artifact
in fact, the skull was studied
through X-rays and computerized tomography
which represents an evolution
of radiographic techniques
to assess the skull's preservation
and to identify basic anthropological traits
thanks to this information, we now know that
inside the cemí
there is part of the skull of an adult male
who presents clear cranial deformation of the frontal bone
likely the result of intentional action
radiological studies also allowed us
to analyze the interior of the entire structure
highlighting a highly complex
multi-material composition
crafted from different materials
with remarkable artisanal skill
finally, radiocarbon dating
has placed the artifact in the pre-Columbian period
an aspect that has greatly increased its value